Dr. Gronemann, who has been or was in the College of
Education before its inception, right?
Today is November the 3rd. I am visiting in Dr.
Gronemann's home, and we're going to, he's going
to share a few of his perceptions and thoughts
about happenings at Texas A&M before the College
of Education became a College of Education. And
Dr. Gronemann, can you give me a little background
on what the connection was with the College of
Engineering and this Department of Education as
such. What was there? What kind of collaboration
was there? Well, our Department of Industrial
Education was within the School of Engineering.
And
obviously, our being a department of teacher
education, We had a very close relationship with
other departments who were preparing teachers.
Primarily the department of what was known then as
Education and Psychology. Prior to it becoming a
part of the College of Education. And who was in the
department, who was head of that educational
department? Department of Education and
Psychology at the time that you were working with
them? Professor Wilcox is the first one we worked
with. Succeeding him, we worked then with Dr.
Hensarly.
And how long did this continue until, until what
time was this, was this in that, in that context
where it was part of the College of Engineering?
I came here in 1940.
The Industrial Education Department was within
the College of Engineering because there was no
College of Education.
We collaborated very closely with the Department
of Education and Psychology, primarily with
Professor Wilcox, preceding him I
guess we served two deans because of this
relationship. Correct. However, I
guess we were technically a part of the College of
Engineering, at least that's Where did your
funding come from? That's where our funding came
from.
But did you get any information on when the Council
on Teacher Education was formed or not? I'm sure
it's in the documents. I don't have that verified
yet document. With the establishment of the
Council I guess it was called Council of Teacher
Education, which embodied departments from
various colleges.
We reported on educational matters
to the dean of education while at the same time
keeping our own dean apprised. Actually, Dean
Hubert was Dean of Liberal Arts at first. It was
called Arts and Sciences? I guess so. And then it
became Liberal Arts. Yeah. So he was the dean that
you worked under when you were in that department.
We reported to him on matters that pertained to
teacher education. Technically, my boss was Dean
Benson. Oh, okay, very good. Now, the mission of a
college, a land-grant university, is of course
teaching, research, and service. When you were in
this department, in the Department of Industrial
Education, was there a balance between those
three? What kind of attention was given to the
teaching, research, and service? Did one take
priority over another, or were they... stressed
equally?
Well, I presume the major college or school was
education.
However, those of us in the separate departments
treated the matter as a school-wide exercise. And
we just merely had to keep our deans apprised of
what we were doing. When did this Department of
Industrial Education come into the College of
Education fold? Was it when the college was
initiated or after?
Was it one of the departments from the very
beginning when the college was established? You
mean the College of Education? Yes, sir.
Industrial
education was not a part of the College of
Education when the College of Education was
established.
We were treated, though, as it were.
We took our responsibilities of departmental
operation from the deans of our respective
colleges. or schools as they were known then. So
was there a lot of collaboration then in those days
between departments like that? That had to do with
teacher education? Right. Yes, and that included
ag education. I was going to say that was the other
branch of it. I don't recall the year that the
Council on Teacher Education was established.
But When it was established,
the heads of the departments of education and
psychology, ag education, and industrial
education
worked as though the council was a school or a
college, even though they were still separate.
Were you head of that department of industrial
education? Yes. I was also coordinator of the
council on teacher education. What degrees were
offered in that department in industrial ed? A
bachelor of science, a master of science, and a
master of education.
And did you have anything to do with establishing
the doctoral program? That's what I heard. Can you
tell me a little bit about that? How that came
about?
idea, how the idea started and what the process was
to get it established?
I don't know if I can. I recall there was a necessity
for a college in the state of Texas to offer a
doctorate program for teachers of industrial
education. They preferred the teachers in the
state requested that we try to set up such a program
rather than make everyone who wanted to have a
doctorate degree go through the process of
doing it all in areas of general education.
Those in agricultural education and in
industrial education felt, we'd like to offer a
doctorate in our field, not in general education.
And that's how we came about. And that doctorate
was offered in the department, still through the
College of Engineering? That's right. And what
kinds of classes were taught? What did you teach
when you were in that department? What were some of
the courses that you taught? Well, you mean
generally that I taught or that we had? Well, both.
Well, in industrial education, our primary
purpose was the preparation of teachers for
industrial and vocational education.
Vocational education meaning trade and
industrial education. Industrial arts being the
group of people who were not eligible to become
teachers under the vocational program due to lack
of industrial experience.
So all of the courses were basically geared to the
industrial arts and vocational? Industrial and
the vocational. Industrial arts, do you think,
industrial arts is for those kids in school who are
not particularly interested in becoming
tradespeople. Whereas the trade and industrial
program was geared to preparing teachers who
could, in turn, because of their experience in
industry,
prepare high school youngsters for direct entry
into many trades.
How many years were you in that department? Well, I
came in 1940. And retired? I
retired in 1967.
And then went to Fresno, California State
University for another eight years, because they
had no upper limit on age. So we lived in California
pretty long. Well, we live in Carmel. You know
where that is? Yes, of course. That's where I want
to live someday. And I commuted over to Fresno, 150
miles, on Monday, Monday morning, and came back.
They gave me a good schedule over there. I'd go
there Monday morning and came back Thursday
afternoon. Well, you lived in heaven if you were in
Carmel because that's one of the most beautiful
places. But the difference is Californians are a
different breed of people. The Texans. And we were
used to Texans. So you came back? Yeah. That's
great. Okay, now let me ask you something about
those days and changes. Was there something that
stands out in your mind as being, you know, other
than the women being admitted into A&M, other
things that might have had a great impact and
changed the way things were done in that
department or influenced its growth?
We didn't have a girl or ladies in industrial arts
or vocational industrial program immediately.
But ultimately, as girls and women were
permitted, we did begin to get students
interested. Did that surprise you? No. We
welcomed it. That
was one of the great things that turned A&M around,
the women coming here.
A lot of people fought it for the state, but it's the
best thing that ever happened to A&M.
There was a tremendous growth, maybe it wasn't as
noticeable then, but Did the growth that came
about so quickly have any influence on your
interaction with students, on your ability to
counsel with students and so forth? No, we just had
more students. That complicated it. Plus we had
more students. But students are all alike. So you
still had enough time, though, to work with them?
Yeah, we made time. Because students was our
business. Do you have a feel... Boone is one of
them. Sir? Boone is one of them. Right. A feel for
how the perceptions of outsiders, what kind of
perceptions did they have for this, you know,
Department of Industrial Education? How was it
viewed across the state or even beyond that or
within the university? What were people's
perceptions of the department you have? Well,
those interested in... of occupational oriented
programs were very pleased, especially in the
industrial arts and vocational education areas
when A&M got into the advanced degree programs. We
had a lot of people who wanted to come here that had
gotten their undergraduate work other places to
do their doctorate here. There was none in the
state in our field. Was this the first one? Yes,
ma'am. Did a lot of them come about as a result of
that? Are there a lot of people now that offer that
degree? Yes. North Texas, East Texas.
I'm positive of those schools offering the
advanced degree, doctoral degree. But it was A&M
then that offered the first one in the state. The
University of Texas offered a doctorate degree,
but not in industrial education. People who had
industrial arts and vocational industrial
backgrounds could go there, but they got no more of
their field.
You tell me a little bit about some of the
highlights, and you were here for 27 years. Some of
the things that maybe stand out in your mind is
having had a lot of significance or maybe personal
gratification of things that happened other than
establishing this doctoral program, which I'm
sure was probably one of your great contributions
along with other things. Well, we felt that the
doctoral program being offered here in all fields
was very beneficial to Texas A&M University. And
as a result, I think the people throughout the
state had a much higher regard for A&M because they
were doing that. In fact, we had to offer a
doctorate degree for quite a few years before the
normal
state teachers colleges got into that.
Any insights or observations or maybe some little
anecdotes or something that happened that would
not be in any documents that are just from your own
personal experience, be someone or some
individuals that might have either influenced
you or you felt you had had influence on that went on
to do. I think a difference that we noticed
immediately was when we started offering the
advanced degrees was that we attracted people
from other states throughout the United States,
which benefited our program as well as the
university because they got a good impression of
Texas A&M. They used to think of it as an all-male
Hick school.
And of course, we were glad to get additional
exposure for our own department. Because not many
in the United States had doctoral programs in our
field. In fact, I think we were about the third.
Penn State and the University of Missouri, I
think, were the only two that had doctoral
programs in our field.
It took a long time to get people, general people,
citizens, oriented to the idea that we were not
shop people, per se. But there were a lot of facets
in the educational program that they could get in
no way other than to go to get advanced degrees.
Do you have a feel for where that area is now, or how
it has evolved? What is going on in the schools now
that relates to these beginnings? I think because
of the advanced degree, And the status that it put,
industrial education, vocational education,
gave us a much higher recognition in the public
schools by the administrators. They used to think
we were all wood butchers.
I think A&M led the pack. in doing this thing,
because I taught at East Texas before I came here.
And our idea at East Texas was A&M is a cow college.
When I got here, I saw little cows.
Okay. Well, as the administrators began to change
their view of these teachers, what did that do to
people wanting to come into education when it
became, you know, a college of education and to go
out there and be able to teach. Are you thinking
about our field? Mm-hmm. In industrial. I think it
gave our field a good recognition and an upgrading
of the status of industrial education by
everyone.
Now industrial education that is offered in the
schools for students? Is it for students that just
want to be able to get a skill to go out to work rather
than continue with their education? What is the
thrust? Well, first, I think it almost has to be
pointed out, is the industrial education being
offered in the public schools under the
jurisdiction of federal Smith Hughes and what is
it? Barton Act? Vocational acts. National
vocational acts.
Because if they graduate under that, the
assumption is those teachers will train high
school kids to go to industry. That's not always
true. If they graduated from a program that was
both general educational as well as vocational,
then the hope was that the youngsters in high
school would have a better appreciation of
industry and people that work in industry as they
would in agriculture. I haven't seen the funny
papers yet. You must get them. That's all I ever
read was the funny papers. That's probably the
best part. It keeps me happy. So then, how is that
handled in the schools now? Are they still very
separate? You know, the vocational programs
still totally separate from the regular general
education, do you know? In the high schools?
Mm-hmm. Well, observation of it is that if you have
a teacher who is qualified for vocational
certification, it means that the high school can
get federal monies. for the teacher. And in turn,
they would then expect those teachers to
intensify entry in the industry when they get out
of high school, or before they get out of high
school. Was there always very strong federal
support for all these programs when you were
involved in it? A lot of federal funding and state
funding as well? Yeah, states had to match
federal.
Is that still true? I presume it is. I haven't been
in the racket so long.
You probably are familiar with a lot of the current
reforms in education and what parole is trying to
do and what a lot of people are saying about the
vocational and these changes, for example, now
the core curriculum coming in at A&M and everybody
has to take all these particular courses. What is
your reaction to that, to those kinds of reforms?
We haven't seen enough of it yet to know how
effective it is in the long run.
We have felt, going back a bit now, that those
graduating in college in vocational type
programs, industrial and vocational,
have a better opportunity to get children in the
secondary schools acquainted with industry and
other occupational areas because they can't all
go to college. And the trade and industrial and
vocational homemaking and all of those, that is
their purpose generally, to get high school kids
ready to go to industry. They don't care whether
they go to college or not. Or they don't, so I won't
say that. But if they don't go, they've got a good
background. Industrial arts is mostly
sort of dual. We want them to get some appreciation
of vocations, but we also want them to get an idea of
what industry is all about.
Do you feel like there is some kind of a thrust or
movement to de-emphasize vocational or not to not
give it, because it was in its heyday, say, back in
the, what, 60s or 70s? And then it seemed like the
pendulum has swung a little bit. Is it likely to go
back, or where do you feel that is right now? Do you
have a feel for that? Well, I don't have a real feel
for it, probably because I'm too deeply involved
in it, always have been. I think there's... a
feeling by some high school administrators that
they want the kids to go to college. And they don't
want them to stop when they get out of high school.
Probably the more liberal thinking nowadays is
that they need to have a choice.
And a good background in vocational and in
industrial To me, it's good for everybody.
Probably because I'm involved. Well, it's fine. I
had one person tell me... They can go overboard,
too. Somebody told me, though, that back in the old
days, we're talking about the 50s probably, this
particular person had chosen the vocational.
Then he changed his mind and wanted to go to college
and was punished, was even thrown out of school.
you know, for wanting to go to college. And he felt
very strongly about what you're saying, that you
should have a choice, but just because you choose
when you maybe start going into high school that
you want to go to the vocational route, if halfway
down the road you decide maybe you would like to go
to college, that you still should have that
option. Does it track students into something
where then they can't get out? I think the programs
ought to be built so the teachers don't try to
influence them. Against the kids' will. Now,
parents may be of such financial status that they
can't send their children to college.
But by the same token, they don't want them to be
wood butchers. I mean, there was. I don't think
it's much anymore, because the people that felt
that are much older now. Shut up. The younger ones
who are getting into that classification, I
think, can understand that
occupational orientation
via information or experiences are good for
everybody and do not curtail them.
In closing, is there anything that you would like
to summarize
your career in this field? Obviously, you love it
and you feel very strongly about it. Is there
something that you would like to close with that
has influenced you or you have influenced? I don't
know. I've influenced everybody, actually.
Ten years ago I would have said that we have to keep
people from saying derogatory comments about
occupational educational type programs. On a
college level or any level? Anywhere. Okay. I
think today it is a well accepted fact that it might
have been a good idea for all
students to have had some experiences of that type
because they are as valuable as other courses they
take. A lot of this, you know, has been generated
through superintendents, pro and con. Some of
them think we all ought to have a lot of it. Other
superintendents say we're going to have no
vocational programs. We don't want our students
influenced that way. We want them to come up
culturally. You know, I've run into that. Not
anymore, but I have run into that. When I go on, or
more when I was at East Texas, I'd be invited to talk
to various groups, the Waters Alliance, or the
industrial educational oriented groups.
And it was kind of hard to get them to understand
that. Now, people, I don't think, think
begrudgingly against occupational type courses
in public schools anymore. How do you think that
would affect the dropout? You know, there's such a
scary thing right now about dropouts and
potential, you know, the at-risk student, that's
all you're hearing about right now. Do you feel
that this could have an impact if it was emphasized
more on keeping students in school, possibly?
Probably if they could earmark the kids that are
going that way, that need to go that way. I think
probably one thing that has helped us more than
anything is guidance counselors now. We didn't
used to have them.
In what way? Just by being able to lead the students
into? Yeah, by not being narrow-minded, but
having broad concepts of Occupational
opportunities. I don't mean industry. I mean all
occupational opportunities. Career education
is what I'm trying to say. It's called career
education now. I don't know if that's a more
acceptable term or not. It depends on who we are. To
me, it doesn't matter. But some of you said, oh, I
want my boy to go to vocational school. No, I don't
want him to go be a wood butcher or carpenter. But if
you can talk to them about careers, then that's
something different. That's right. I run into
that. Well, Dr. Gronemann, I really appreciate
your taking this time to visit with me. It's been
very enlightening, and I appreciate your time. I
appreciate what you did to get these things for
A&M, because people like you have had so much
influence on making A&M what it is today. I've
enjoyed my stay here. It's gone fast. Glad to have
you. Since 1940.